East Hartford Public Schools
East Hartford, Connecticut
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 6,504
Economically disadvantaged: 61.1%

Three largest racial demographics:
White: 44.8%
Hispanic/Latino: 32.1%
Black/African-American: 12.4%

Thomas Anderson, Superintendent
Laura Roberts, Chief Communications and Marketing Officer, roberts.ll@easthartford.org
   ●​ “Our work is centered around the coherence of clarity, accountability, and measurement.
       We believe that accountability isn't a negative term; it’s a commitment we make to the
       students and families we serve every day.”

Background:
Situated across the Connecticut River from the state capital of Hartford, East Hartford Public
Schools (EHPS) has established a trajectory of significant academic momentum. In the
2024-2025 school year, the district saw overall performance increases in ELA, math, and
science for all students, including those within high-needs student groups. This progress is
highlighted by two EHPS schools being named Connecticut “Schools of Distinction,” a
recognition awarded to the top 10% of schools statewide for high academic achievement or
growth. Led by Superintendent Thomas Anderson, a hometown native who returned to lead the
district in 2023, EHPS has institutionalized intentional data systems and routines and scaled
strategies to drive growth across nearly every grade level.

Strategies for Success:
Transparency and data-driven accountability:
   ●​ Inspired by the NYPD’s “CompStat” model and previous work in Montgomery County
       Public Schools in Maryland, Superintendent Anderson holds roughly five to seven STAT
       Meetings per year. These meetings convene all school and department leaders as the
       central office team presents system-level data transparently, allowing schools to identify
       shared challenges, avoid siloed efforts, and adopt successful strategies from their peers.
   ●​ Schools also host and lead three Student Achievement Meetings per year, which are
       data-intensive reviews with central office staff. Schools discuss aligned systems and
       local assessments and analyze progress monitoring efforts. They are able to identify
       high-leverage actions that improve student growth and achievement. Superintendent
       Anderson participates in every meeting to emphasize that analyzing data is a
       district-wide priority.
   ●​ The district conducts monthly district leadership team meetings to calibrate instructional
       expectations. Administrators discuss specific look-fors to ensure that feedback given
       during learning walks is meaningful, targeted, and consistent across the district.
   ●​ Superintendent Anderson emphasizes that sustainable growth must often be “no-cost,”
       focusing on educator strengths and refined practices rather than costly new programs.
       District strategic planning prioritizes professional learning for educators,
       student-centered coaching systems, ongoing data analysis, and strong curriculum,
       assessment, and instructional protocols to improve educators’ ability to meet students’
       needs and accelerate progress. This involves being disciplined about stopping initiatives
       that aren’t working and doubling down on fundamental instructional supports.
Strategic math and literacy interventions:
    ●​ EHPS has tightened the alignment of its curriculum and restructured its personnel to
       provide more flexible, specialized support for teachers and students. This includes
       aligning curriculum and assessment practices that have a strong research and learning
       strategy base for all levels. Core work at the elementary and middle grades has been to
       expand knowledge, application, and programming aligned with the science of reading
       and problem-based learning math approaches. Connecting quality curriculum and
       instructional materials across all content areas, along with professional development to
       meet the needs of all learners, allows for improvement in student growth and
       achievement. The district has a comprehensive assessment system that allows teams to
       track student progress that is ultimately measured by state accountability assessments.
       This local assessment system allows educators to remain focused on high quality
       instruction for all students.
    ●​ Instructional coaches were recently shifted from being elementary building-based only, to
       supporting buildings across the district from PreK- grade 8. This focus on a district
       instructional coach team allows teachers and students to get proactive support, training,
       and instruction in a more aligned way. This innovation ensures that all schools maintain
       a common through line in instruction, assessment, and needs-analysis.
    ●​ Primarily focused at the middle school level, the district builds tutoring blocks into the
       school day, using formative assessment data and teacher observations to form small
       Math Lab classes of eight to ten students at a time.

Tackling chronic absenteeism:
   ●​ The district has participated in the state-funded Learner Engagement and Attendance
       Program (LEAP), which supported paying staff to conduct home visits to re-engage
       students who are chronically absent. Launched in early 2021, an analysis of LEAP
       statewide found that attendance rates increased by 4% in the month immediately
       following the first LEAP visit and continued to grow over time. Nine months after the first
       LEAP visit, PK-5 students experienced an 8-percentage point increase in attendance,
       and students in grades 6-12 experienced a 16-percentage point increase over students
       who were not served during the same period.
   ●​ Most EHPS schools are staffed with a dedicated Bilingual Family Support Specialist to
       build bridges between the school and families and address non-academic barriers to
       attendance. The Family Support Specialists also connect families to a variety of
       resources, including food banks, health centers, and other services offered through town
       offices and community organizations.
   ●​ STAT meetings revealed that while automated calls had minimal impact on attendance,
       personal phone calls from staff––spending just 10 minutes a day to call five
       families––resulted in a measurable difference in student attendance.
