Atlanta Public Schools
Atlanta, GA
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 49,878
Economically Disadvantaged: 59.8%

Three largest racial demographics:
Black: 70%
White: 16.3%
Hispanic: 8.5%

Dr. Bryan Johnson, Superintendent
Nicole Lawson, Chief Communications Officer, nclawson@apsk12.org
    ●​ “It's not just about the numbers for us, it's bigger than the numbers. This is about kids
       and their future, their ability to thrive and to find their voice. And so, for us, all of those
       things make the work urgent and important.”
    ●​ “It’s hard to build on weak foundations, which is why we’ve focused on getting back to
       the basics by ensuring alignment between our instruction and the Georgia state
       standards. We use a combination of measures to get a holistic, ‘just-in-time’ view of
       student performance. This data allows us to be responsive rather than reactive,
       providing immediate, targeted support based on exactly what our students need at that
       moment.”

Background:
Atlanta Public Schools (APS) is a large, urban school district serving over 49,878 students
across 87 school sites. In 2015, APS joined the growing number of Georgia districts classified
as Charter Systems, gaining freedom and flexibility from almost all state education laws and
regulation to innovate in exchange for increased accountability for student achievement. Given
this autonomy, APS leadership has tightened its focus on the instructional core, innovating to
meet specific student needs while prioritizing tight alignment between core curricula and
Georgia state standards across APS’ 87 school sites.

Strategies for Success:
Strengthening literacy and math instruction:
    ●​ APS has made a sustained and strategic investment in Tier 1 instruction, with a
       particular emphasis on literacy and foundational math. District leaders have prioritized
       tight alignment between core curricula and Georgia state standards. The district has
       committed to increasing both 3rd grade ELA proficiency and 8th grade math proficiency
       by 20% by 2030.
    ●​ In literacy, APS utilizes Benchmark Advance and Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Into
       Reading. The district aims for teachers to implement these curricula with full fidelity,
       providing teachers with aligned instructional resources, pacing guides, and
       assessments. To ensure strong implementation, APS provides in-depth training to school
       leaders and instructional coaches, who then provide targeted support to teachers
       through structured professional learning and ongoing coaching cycles.
    ●​ Principals and Assistant Principals engage in monthly content specific professional
       learning aligned to the state standards to guide and support teachers in implementing
       instructional resources and curriculum guides.
    ●​ Instructional Coaches participate in monthly professional learning aligned to our
       instructional framework and state standards to prepare teachers for upcoming lessons.
    ●​ Literacy Coaches participate in monthly training aligned to the science of reading.
   ●​ Through a partnership between the Georgia Department of Education and the
      Atlanta-based Rollins Center for Language & Literacy at the Atlanta Speech School,
      APS elementary ELA teachers participate in summer training in evidence-based literacy
      practices, including phonics instruction, language development, and early literacy
      intervention strategies. According to the Rollins Center, 80% of teachers who participate
      in their training improve their language-centered ecosystem (not specific to APS).
   ●​ APS also uses targeted ELA interventions outside of traditional instruction. For example,
      Reading Futures is used in select middle schools to provide an additional 30 minutes of
      literacy instruction during the school day, delivered by certified teachers.
   ●​ The APS Literacy Council helps to guide the district’s literacy strategy. The council
      includes district leaders as well as external literacy experts from the community, creating
      a structure for ongoing collaboration between APS and entities with deep expertise in
      reading instruction.
   ●​ In math, APS has emphasized foundational learning. This emphasis includes providing
      students and teachers with access to high-quality curricula, including Carnegie Math for
      middle school students and C-Gage Math for high school students.
   ●​ Alongside these curricula, the district utilizes state-developed instructional materials
      (such as this example for math) to support teachers in designing standards-aligned
      lessons and assignments. APS is intentional in articulating to teachers that curricula
      should be balanced with individualizing instruction to meet student needs.

Learning from student data:
   ●​ APS uses a clearly defined set of assessment tools and data routines to drive
       instructional decisions and target support. The district administers NWEA MAP
       assessments twice per year (with an optional third administration) to measure student
       growth and benchmark performance. To provide more immediate, standards-aligned
       insights, APS uses MasteryConnect. This system allows for assessments to be
       customized to address specific Georgia state standards. During the 2025-2026 school
       year, APS also implemented Amira ISIP Assess, a new assessment to monitor mastery
       of foundational literacy skills.
   ●​ These tools are used together to triangulate student performance. MAP provides a broad
       measure of growth, while Mastery Connect identifies specific standards where students
       are not yet proficient. This combination allows teachers and leaders to make precise
       instructional adjustments. Additionally, MAP and district assessment data are used to
       place students into summer learning programs and determine the type of intervention
       they receive.
   ●​ APS has also developed a school tiering system based on the Learning Leader
       Framework. Schools are categorized quarterly using formative assessment results and
       data from principal supervisors, allowing the district to differentiate support. Schools with
       greater needs receive additional resources, including teacher coaching, walk-throughs
       and feedback cycles, professional learning community (PLC) planning and support, and
       lesson modeling.
   ●​ Data is reviewed consistently by both building and district leaders. District leaders meet
       weekly with principals to review student performance, discuss instructional challenges,
       and identify necessary supports.
   ●​ The district also uses data to inform “just-in-time” professional development. This model
       tailors teacher training to current student needs rather than predetermined topics.

Summer learning:
  ●​ During the month of June, APS runs a variety of programs for students in grades K-12.
     All programming is free to students, and the district provides students with meals and
      transportation to help make these programs more accessible for families.
   ●​ Power Up programming is divided between grades K-5, 6-8, and 9-12. When students
      enroll in the program, their MAP scores and district assessment data are used to inform
      their classroom placement and promote access to individualized instruction by summer
      learning staff. More than half of students who attended Power Up in 2025 met their math
      and ELA growth goals, and among elementary students with the highest academic need,
      participants met growth targets at a higher rate than non-participants, especially in ELA.
   ●​ All instruction is delivered by certified teachers. Additionally, APS sees summer
      programs as a way to provide more leadership opportunities to educators; teachers can
      apply to be summer site leaders, developing the skills needed to take on building- or
      district-level leadership positions in the future.
   ●​ The Power Up programs balance academic instruction with other targeted learning and
      enrichment opportunities, such as STEM activities, arts programming, gifted instruction,
      and dual language immersion programs.

Investing in educators:
    ●​ In 2025 and 2026, APS received a Gallup Exceptional Workplace Award, demonstrating
        its continued commitment to supporting their teacher workforce. This commitment is
        reflected in the district’s 90% teacher retention rate.
    ●​ The district has also invested in instructional coaches for every elementary school as
        one strategy to both promote high-quality instruction and teacher readiness, employing
        approximately 110 instructional coaches in the 2025-2026 school year. These coaches
        provide job-embedded support to classroom teachers by modeling lessons, assisting
        with analyzing and translating student data, and supporting curriculum alignment and
        implementation. While this is just one strategy to enhance instruction at the elementary
        level, the district saw significant growth on the 2025-2026 Fall-to-Winter MAP
        assessment compared to 2024-2025 Fall-to-Winter MAP.
    ●​ APS has created formal teacher leadership roles to extend the knowledge and impact of
        its most effective educators. One role is Master Teacher Leaders, who offer frequent,
        non-evaluative support to new or struggling teachers. APS leans on Master Teacher
        Leaders to help reduce variability in the quality of instruction across classrooms, acting
        with urgency and creatively solving problems to minimize gaps in instructional quality.
        These teachers are identified based on classroom data and strong student outcomes
        and have a reduced teaching load to be able to provide real-time coaching and feedback
        to peers. APS recognizes that not all teachers want to become building administrators;
        the Master Teacher Leader position gives teachers the opportunity to grow without
        leaving the classroom.
