College Community School District
Cedar Rapids, Iowa
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 5,800 students
Economically disadvantaged: 39.8%

Three largest racial demographics:
Black/African-American: 16.7%
Hispanic: 7.5%
White: 65.3%

Dr. Doug Wheeler, Superintendent of Schools for the College Community School District
(dwheeler@crprairie.org)
    ●​ “I am immensely proud of our progress in meeting the evolving academic and
       transferable skill needs of our students. Our entire team: administrators, teachers, and
       support staff is dedicated to accelerating student growth through a foundation of shared
       language, clear systems, and responsive collaboration. We have fostered an
       environment where student success is powered by the continuous growth, specialized
       expertise, and deep-seated dedication of our team with the support of our families and
       community.”

Background:

College Community School District serves approximately 5,800 students in Cedar Rapids, Iowa,
and is outpacing similar districts in both math and reading growth.

With the leadership of Superintendent Dr. Doug Wheeler and an experienced and dedicated
cadre of District and Building Administrators, the district has focused on building a coherent,
systemwide approach to instruction and support, aligning strong classroom teaching, MTSS,
targeted interventions, and family engagement. Despite increases in English learners and
higher-need student populations, the district has sustained academic progress by emphasizing
consistency across schools, collaboration among educators, and supports that extend beyond
the classroom. This work is grounded in the District’s learner-centered, future-focussed 10-year
strategic plan.

Strategies for Success:

Coherent Instruction + Strong Tiered Supports (MTSS)
   ●​ The district built a multi-year, systemwide MTSS framework, ensuring all students are
      regularly screened in math and literacy and receive targeted interventions in real time.
   ●​ Students receive support through tier 1 (universal) instruction and structured intervention
      blocks (“WIN time – What I Need”) embedded in the school day.
   ●​ Teachers use decision trees and intervention protocols to match supports to student
      needs.
   ●​ Each school operates a leadership team (“CADRE”) that:
          ○​ Regularly reviews data
          ○​ Conducts MTSS self-assessments
          ○​ Aligns action plans to building needs and district priorities
          ○​ Creates, facilities and monitors the School Improvement Plan
Instructional Quality + Teacher Implementation Focus
    ●​ The district prioritized tight alignment to state standards and high-quality instructional
        materials through the development of a long-range curriculum review cycle.
    ●​ The District adopted the New Teacher Center’s Core Capabilities instructional framework
        to support teacher development
    ●​ Analyzed student performance data and staff implementation data to identify targeted
        professional development, which incudes:
            ○​ Instructional coaching
            ○​ Structured planning tool
            ○​ Ongoing classroom observation cycles
            ○​ Lesson studies
    ●​ Expanded Preschool access through partnerships and redesigned experiences through
        experiential learning models to support language development, 65% of incoming
        Kindergarten students have a preschool experienced in our district.

Targeted Support for High-Need Student Populations (ELL + Special Education)
   ●​ Rapid growth in English learners led to:
          ○​ Expanded staffing and increased collaboration and training opportunities for EL
              teachers
          ○​ An individualized newcomer pathway for students who are new to the country
              with programming based on their past educational experiences, English
              proficiency, academic skills, and future goals.
          ○​ Districtwide training for all K-12 teachers regarding strategies to increase EL
              students’ opportunities for reading, writing, and speaking in the classroom
   ●​ Strengthened special education through:
          ○​ Realignment of Special Education staffing across the district to best meet the
              needs of students.
          ○​ Strong community-based transition programs for students in 18+ programming
              for IEP needs.
          ○​ The implementation of a therapeutic classroom model utilizing a research-based
              therapeutic approach to meet the needs of struggling learners with social,
              emotional, behavior IEP needs. Therapeutic models exist in both our
              comprehensive and special school settings, expanding our continuum of
              services.
Whole-Child Strategy + Family Engagement
   ●​ Expanded wraparound supports:
          ○​ Community Engagement Specialists
          ○​ Resource centers (e.g., food pantry, clothing and school material supports)
          ○​ Family resource events (registration, supplies, services)
   ●​ Launched “Great Start Conferences”:
          ○​ Families individually meet teachers before school starts
          ○​ Builds early trust and alignment
   ●​ Implemented ParentSquare for communication in 100+ languages
Strong Culture: Leadership Stability, Attendance, and Student Engagement
    ●​ Long-term leadership and teacher retention enabled consistent implementation over
       time.
    ●​ Maintained low chronic absenteeism (often under 10%), a key driver of academic
       growth, with the district average for elementaries 5% lower than the Iowa average for
       chronic absenteeism at the elementary level
    ●​ Built systems that promote:
           ○​ Student ownership (e.g., mastery tracking like Badge Books)
           ○​ Consistent behavior expectations across schools

Future Focus Grounded in Best Practice
   ●​ Expanded career readiness and student-centered programming, including Future Ready
       Me, an innovative STEM and Wellness course designed for elementary students. In
       addition to STEM and wellness concepts, students are introduced to a variety of career
       pathways related to these fields, sparking interest in future opportunities and building
       early connections to secondary education pathways available at Prairie High School.
       Through interactive projects and real-world applications, students will strengthen
       executive functioning skills, enhance focus, and build confidence, ensuring they are
       future-ready both academically and personally.
   ●​ Worked with industry partners and national research to identify PRAIRIE READY
       indicators, readiness skills to underpin program/course development and learner
       experiences at the secondary level.
   ●​ Building on a strong foundation of literacy and numeracy, at the secondary level, the
       focus of application and durable skills is strengthened through a career
       academy/pathway system, including regionally relevant pathways in agriculture, health
       sciences/nursing, culinary arts, building trades, aviation mechanics, and teaching, with
       more pathways ready for launch.
