Kuna Joint School District
Kuna, Idaho
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 5,649
White: 76%
Hispanic/Latino: 16.2%
Students from Low Income Families: 38%

Kim Bekkedahl, Superintendent (2024–present)
kbekkedahl@kunaschools.org


Background: Kuna Joint School District (KJSD) serves an increasing student population in a
rural but growing region of Idaho. Under the aligned, consistent leadership of former
Superintendent Wendy Johnson and Superintendent Kim Bekkedahl, the district has
transformed into a model for evidence-based instruction. By prioritizing systemic
alignment––ensuring that everyone from the school board to principals are trained in
evidence-based practices––the district has established a deeply rooted culture of data-driven
decision-making and instructional excellence.

Strategies for Success:
Strengthening the foundation for data-driven decision-making:
    ●​ KJSD partnered with the McREL Institute to equip principals as instructional leaders,
       focusing on 21 specific leadership practices proven to drive student achievement. These
       practices include being knowledgeable about and involved in curriculum and instruction,
       and monitoring the effectiveness of school practices. The district solidified this shift by
       aligning its principal evaluation system with McREL’s research-based best practices, and
       adopting a similar model for district-level leadership evaluation.
    ●​ The district facilitates a multi-tiered leadership structure to align instruction from the
       central office to the classroom. At the district level, monthly Guiding Coalition meetings
       bring together principals and instructional coaches to model leadership strategies and
       align on the district’s broader goals, which were recently codified in a set of essential
       standards.
    ●​ This model is mirrored at the school level, where principals lead their own monthly
       Guiding Coalition meetings with instructional coaches and educators to discuss
       building-level instructional decisions.
    ●​ To ensure these strategies reach daily practice, teacher professional learning
       communities (PLCs) meet weekly, providing a consistent venue for maintaining
       alignment between the district’s vision and classroom instruction. The district implements
       an early student release schedule for Wednesdays to provide teachers with dedicated
       time for PLC meetings.
    ●​ Annually, each principal identifies a specific instructional goal to serve as a focal point for
       the school year, such as increasing student discourse during mathematics blocks. To
       ensure these goals translate into classroom practice, principals collaborate with
       instructional coaches to develop specific “look-fors” that demonstrate progress toward
       the objective. Throughout the year, principals and instructional coaches support teachers
       through regular classroom observations and targeted feedback cycles, and progress
       toward the annual goal is formally reviewed during building-wide meetings held several
       times a year.
Implementing high-quality literacy and math instruction:
   ●​ KJSD established an early commitment to evidence-based literacy by training all staff in
      the science of reading starting in 2009. To ensure alignment at all levels, reading
      coaches completed both specialized coach training and the foundational teacher
      training. Over a three-year period, every principal and district leader also participated in
      the same science of reading training as teachers to recognize and support effective
      reading instruction. Even board members engaged in the training to ensure they could
      articulately advocate for the district’s instructional shifts.
   ●​ The district implements high-quality literacy curriculum at all levels: Houghton-Mifflin
      Harcourt’s Into Reading for elementary school (beginning in 2026-27), Savvas’
      myPerspectives in middle school, and CommonLit in high school.
   ●​ English Language Arts (ELA) educators rely on a variety of data to drive instructional
      decisions. K-5 students are required by the state to take benchmark exams twice a year
      through Amira Learning (previously i-Station) in addition to the end-of-year state
      assessment; the district also administers Amira’s monthly formative literacy assessment.
      In addition, elementary teacher teams develop common formative assessments (CFAs)
      to monitor student progress, which are delivered monthly to all students and more
      frequently to students needing intervention.
   ●​ Beginning in the 2025-26 school year, KJSD created a separate reading class block in
      addition to Language Arts for middle school.
   ●​ In math, teachers use Curriculum Associates’ i-Ready curriculum for grades K-8 and X in
      high school. The curriculum includes regular formative assessments to measure student
      progress, tailored to different student groupings based on proficiency levels.
   ●​ From 2014-Y, KJSD partnered with Boise State University to provide its Teaching
      Mathematical Thinking (TMT) program to educators, which was previously provided by
      the state for Idaho Regions 3 and 4. When state funding for the program was eliminated,
      Boise State assisted KJSD and other districts in securing grants to maintain the initiative,
      which groups educators by region and grade level and focuses on student-centered
      teaching practices in math. While the partnership is no longer in operation, it provided a
      critical foundation for the district’s math leadership and data-driven culture.

Developing effective student learning practices:
   ●​ KJSD has adopted AVID (Advancement Via Individual Determination) programming
      district-wide. This program aims to equip students with tools to help them learn more
      efficiently and effectively through its WICOR (Writing, Inquiry, Collaboration,
      Organization, and Reading) framework. For example, the programming helps students
      learn how to annotate readings effectively so that they can revisit their notes to find the
      most important information.
   ●​ All elementary students receive AVID programming to teach them to organize their
      learning activities and use the WICOR strategies to grow in reading and writing. All sixth
      graders take an AVID class to learn how to study, take notes, and communicate
      effectively. Students in grades 7-12 can choose to take an AVID elective to continue
      strengthening these skills and prepare for college and careers.
