Marion County Public Schools
Lebanon, KY
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 2,937
Economically Disadvantaged: 61%

Three largest racial demographics:
White: 83%
Hispanic/Latino: 11%
Two or more races: 7%

Chris Brady, Superintendent
chris.brady@marion.kyschools.us
    ●​ “In Marion County, our commitment to evidence-based instruction isn’t just about
        adopting a new curriculum; it’s about ensuring every leader and educator has the
        specialized training to implement it with precision.”
    ●​ “We’re committed to reclaiming the classroom for authentic student-to-teacher
        engagement. By intentionally scaling back technology usage, we are refocusing our
        energy on evidence-based practices and standards-aligned instruction that keeps
        students at the center of the learning process.”

Brigitte Blom, President & CEO, Prichard Committee for Academic Excellence
   ●​ "The remarkable academic gains in Marion County are a direct result of a
        community-wide commitment to rigor, evidence-based instruction, and the professional
        growth of their educators,” said Brigitte Blom, President & CEO of The Prichard
        Committee for Academic Excellence. “Marion County's success is a testament to what is
        possible when rural districts prioritize high-quality materials and invest deeply in the
        specialized training required to implement them with precision."

Background:
Marion County Public Schools (MCPS) serves a rural population in central Kentucky. Under the
leadership of Superintendent Chris Brady, the district has prioritized high-quality instructional
materials and direct student-to-teacher engagement. The district’s efforts have yielded
significant growth in recent years; between the 2021-22 and 2024-25 school years, students in
grades 3-7 improved by over 10% in the percentage of those scoring proficient or above in
reading, and the percentage of eighth-grade students scoring proficient or above in math surged
from 18% to 50% in the same time period. By transitioning into a content-specific coaching
model and committing to evidence-based training, MCPS has established a rigorous
environment dedicated to long-term student mastery.

Strategies for Success:
Adopting high-quality curricula and utilizing data-driven instruction:
   ●​ In alignment with Kentucky’s 2022 Read to Succeed Act, the district committed to a full
       rollout of evidence-based literacy curricula, including Amplify CKLA for elementary
       grades and Amplify ELA for middle school. According to Instructional Supervisor Dana
       Thomas, the district prioritized consistent use of Amplify materials for grades K-8 to
       ensure a smooth continuation of learning.
   ●​ To support effective implementation of the materials, MCPS prioritized building teacher
       capacity through a tiered coaching model. In the first year of the elementary rollout of
       Amplify CKLA, the district focused primarily on lesson and unit internalization, and
       coaching support will be more fully implemented in the next academic year to deepen
       that work. At the middle school level, where the internalization process progressed more
       quickly, coaching support––including classroom conversations, participation in
        professional learning communities, and real-time feedback––was introduced earlier in
        the implementation phase.
   ●​   In math, schools use Curriculum Associates’ i-Ready at the elementary level and Savvas
        for middle and high school. Similarly, coaches from the curriculum vendors frequent
        MCPS classrooms to observe and offer feedback.
   ●​   Since 2019, MCPS has utilized instructional coaches to support teacher development,
        but the role was restructured in 2022 to transition from a school-based model to a
        content-driven one. Under this approach, two secondary coaches manage math/ELA
        and science/social studies, while three elementary coaches oversee math, ELA, and
        science/social studies across the district’s four elementary schools.
   ●​   These coaches operate in six-to-nine-week cycles, working directly with teachers to
        deconstruct state standards, conduct deep lesson internalizations, and use diagnostic
        and annual assessment data to drive instructional decisions.
   ●​   The district has encouraged a commitment to literacy by ongoing LETRS (Language
        Essentials for Teachers of Reading and Spelling) training to ELA teachers. This training
        extends beyond the classroom, with both school- and district-level administrators
        completing the program to ensure alignment on evidence-based literacy practices. Since
        2022, 44 teachers and administrators have completed LETRS training in the district. This
        shared knowledge allows leadership to better support teachers and make informed
        decisions about the foundational reading instruction happening across grade levels.

Creating an environment for engagement:
   ●​ After identifying an overuse of digital devices, district leadership led an effort to scale
       back Chromebook and other technology usage to foster more direct student-to-teacher
       engagement. The district implemented monthly technology-free days at the middle
       school level to eliminate digital distractions during the school day.
   ●​ Amanda Farmer, principal at Marion County Middle School, states, “During walkthroughs
       on screen-free days, I observe students that enjoy the tasks they are working on, are
       working collaboratively and are actively engaged in learning. Screen-free days create a
       more student-driven environment rather than a teacher-centered environment.”

Instruction-focused leadership development:
    ●​ The district operates a year-long Aspiring Leaders program that prepares the next
        generation of administrators through book studies, departmental job shadowing, and
        peer-reviewed mock interviews.
    ●​ Retention efforts begin with a structured new teacher support program that pairs
        incoming staff with mentor teachers for classroom observations and collaborative
        meetings. Teacher mentors provide at least 40 hours of support to their new teacher
        partner throughout the school year to guide them through the challenges of the first year
        of teaching.
    ●​ The district encouraged teacher-led innovation by awarding $75,000 across 30 grants to
        educators who proposed creative and effective classroom initiatives to positively affect
        student achievement. This enabled teachers to purchase materials like a
        crescent-shaped white board table for small group math instruction and maps and
        globes to enhance Amplify CKLA instruction.
