Baltimore City Public Schools
Baltimore, MD
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 76,807
Economically Disadvantaged: 70%

Three largest racial demographics:
Black: 70%
Hispanic: 20%
White: 7%

Dr. Sonja Santelises, CEO

Background: Under the leadership of CEO Dr. Sonja Santelises, Baltimore City Public Schools
(City Schools) transformed teaching and learning through strategic investments in literacy, math,
and holistic student supports. Over the past nine years, City Schools has outpaced the state in
growth in English Language Arts (ELA) and has achieved three consecutive years of math
gains, equaling the state’s gains. By leveraging significant public and philanthropic
investments––including over $420 million for community schools and $23 million for secondary
literacy––the district is successfully supporting its students in tackling non-academic barriers
while driving student growth in core subjects. These evidence-based strategies, ranging from
high-dosage tutoring to paid summer credit recovery, ensure that all students remain on a
rigorous track toward graduation and long-term success.

Strategies for Success:
Expanding evidence-based, high-dosage tutoring:
   ●​ City Schools provides high-dosage math tutoring through efforts like the Reach Together
       Tutoring Program, a partnership with the University of Maryland–Baltimore County
       (UMBC). UMBC students have served as math coaches in City Schools since 2016; the
       current Reach Together program was piloted in the 2021-2022 school year with 350
       students in four schools.
   ●​ Through this program, tutors receive $18 per hour to work with 1-2 students, delivering
       sessions at least twice weekly for 45 minutes during the school day’s intervention block.
       Tutors use Saga Education and Rocket Math curricula to provide consistent, high-quality
       instruction to students. A UMBC evaluation of the program found that 85% of students
       felt more confident in math after receiving the tutoring.
   ●​ The Reach Together program expanded in 2023-2024 with a grant from the Maryland
       Tutoring Corps, a one-time opportunity using the state’s ESSER funds to allow nearly
       1,000 college and graduate students across the state to tutor middle schoolers in three
       Maryland districts. Reach Together now reaches 675 students in grades 1-8 across 10
       City Schools sites.

Incentivizing extended learning opportunities:
    ●​ To combat summer and pandemic-related learning loss and high dropout rates, City
        Schools transformed summer school into a robust, curriculum-aligned extended learning
        season.
    ●​ Through a partnership with YouthWorks, a youth employment program under the
        Mayor’s Office of Employment Development, the district pays high school students
        $12.50 per hour to attend intensive summer learning or credit recovery courses, allowing
        them to prioritize graduation requirements without sacrificing necessary income.
   ●​ To ensure instructional consistency, all summer and credit recovery programs utilize the
      district’s core curriculum. According to Dr. Santelises, this consistency not only allows
      students to revisit content they did not master during the school year, but it also allows
      educators to teach units that they did not have time to cover.
   ●​ The district also encouraged philanthropic partners to focus on instructional alignment,
      which led non-district-led summer programs to adopt the same curriculum used in City
      Schools.
   ●​ The district worked with the Baltimore City Department of Recreation and Parks to align
      summer programming schedules so that students did not have to miss out on
      recreational activities due to summer learning.
   ●​ Dr. Santelises attributes much of the success the district has seen with summer learning
      to monitoring attendance during the summer, ensuring that students are actually
      receiving the intervention they need.

Providing holistic support through Community Schools:
   ●​ Leveraging over $420 million in Concentration of Poverty Grants between 2020 and
       2024, the district has turned every school into a designated Community School, serving
       as a physical hub for social services, healthcare, and mental health support.
   ●​ Each site employs a Community School Coordinator who connects families with
       community resources related to housing, employment, food security, and other needs.
       71 City Schools sites also house food pantries.
   ●​ Dr. Santelises emphasizes that providing a single point of contact to support family
       needs significantly alleviates the burden on families to tackle non-academic challenges,
       such as housing and food insecurity, that otherwise negatively impact student learning
       and classroom focus.
   ●​ In addition to assisting with family needs, Community School Coordinators weave in
       programming and resources designed to help families support their child’s education.
       The district has created grade-level learning guides that provide key reading and math
       milestones for grades PreK-5, which includes information about evidence-based learning
       strategies.

Building evidence-based literacy training and instruction:
    ●​ City Schools has administered the DIBELS reading screener three times per year for
       over ten years to measure student performance on key reading skills.
    ●​ Leveraging over $23 million in support from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s
       Networks for School Improvement (NSI) portfolio since 2018, the district has focused on
       secondary literacy through its 9th Grade On-Track Initiative.
    ●​ In 2018, the district has established 26 Literacy Intensive Learning Sites that utilize
       high-quality, standards-aligned ELA curriculum, and onsite literacy coaches to improve
       teacher content and pedagogical knowledge in middle and high school.
    ●​ A 2020 expansion of the program across 12 high schools funds teacher training on
       data-driven progress tracking, earlier access to college and career coaching, and the
       hiring of new staff to ensure ninth graders stay on a trajectory toward graduation.
    ●​ A Mathematica analysis of the NSI initiative (across all 34 NSIs) found that the
       ninth-grade on-track NSI improved students’ grade point average by about 0.11 points
       on a four-point scale, and improved course pass rates by 3-4 percentage points.
