Sikeston Public Schools R-6
Sikeston, MO
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 3,225
Economically disadvantaged: 70%

Three largest racial demographics:
White: 53%
Black: 33%
Two or more races: 9%

Shannon Holifield, Superintendent
sholifield@spsr6.org
   ●​ “In Sikeston, we believe that academic success is impossible without first protecting the
         learning environment through strong classroom management and high expectations for
         student engagement. By empowering our teachers to own the curriculum development
         process and their classrooms, we have created a unified 'Sikeston Way' that ensures
         every student has access to rigorous, standards-aligned instruction and high
         expectations for behavior.”

Background:
Sikeston Public Schools R-6 serves a small, rural community in the Missouri Bootheel region.
The district’s commitment to academic growth is evidenced by a strategic focus on protecting
the learning environment and aligning curriculum directly to Missouri’s state standards. By
shoring up expectations for both behavior and academics, Sikeston has laid the groundwork for
sustained growth in core subjects.

Strategies for Success:
Teacher-led curriculum and assessment:
   ●​ The district has continuously updated and maintained its own curriculum for over a
       decade. Over the last four years, with the guidance of Dr. Janie Payle, teachers have the
       development of the curriculum through a continuous, four stage process: Planning and
       Writing (identifying targets and creating units), Reviewing (including the vertical team
       and community feedback), Adoption (board examination), and Revising (incorporating
       strategies and assessment changes after one year of implementation).
   ●​ All units are designed to be topical or skills-based and must include essential questions,
       big ideas, Tier 3 content-based vocabulary, and research-based teaching activities.
   ●​ Building leaders and staff are tasked with ensuring alignment between the “Written”
       (targets and units), “Taught” (daily strategies and activities), and “Assessed” (common
       diagnostic and summative measures) curriculum.
   ●​ Teachers develop assessments aligned to MAP Growth and Missouri’s high school
       End-of-Course (EOC) questions to accurately gauge progress toward priority standard
       competency. These assessment results are used during weekly data team meetings to
       determine immediate instructional next steps and intervention needs.
   ●​ Each course includes a pacing guide that maps out content over the school year,
       including buffer days to allow for differentiation and additional instructional support.

Structured learning environment:
    ●​ Recognizing that curriculum improvements cannot succeed without effective classroom
       management, the district implemented its Champion Teaching initiative with Dr. Janie
      Pyle. This framework is based on the work of Doug Lemov, which emphasizes student
      engagement and high accountability.
   ●​ Nearly all Sikeston teachers and administrators have been trained in Champion
      Teaching, as well as bus drivers, secretaries, and all support staff to ensure a consistent
      environment of support and discipline across the district. Through this initiative, the
      district has coined the phrase “The Sikeston Way.”
   ●​ By standardizing classroom management, the district has enabled teachers to maximize
      instructional minutes, facilitating more frequent small-group work and whole-group
      explicit instruction with less disruption.

Strategic interventions and community partnerships:
    ●​ Sikeston leverages federal funding and innovative state pilot programs to provide
       targeted support for high-need student populations.
    ●​ The district employs “Title Teachers,” dedicated reading and math interventionists who
       work in Title I schools in the district to provide supplemental support for students who are
       below grade level.
    ●​ To support the science of reading, the district incentivized elementary and middle school
       teachers, academic coaches, and administrators to participate in the free LETRS®
       training provided by the state as part of its Read, Lead, Exceed initiative.
    ●​ Sikeston was selected as the only district in Missouri to host a Star Academy, a nearly
       $1 million “school within a school” for at-risk eighth graders that utilizes hands-on,
       project-based learning tied to local trade and industries. In the 2025-2026 school year,
       its first year of operation, the Academy enrolled 80 students.
    ●​ The district operates a Career and Tech Center that serves eleven sending schools,
       which partners with the Sikeston Chamber of Commerce to align technical training with
       local workforce needs.
