Spring Branch Independent School District
Houston, Texas
Student Demographics:
Total student population: 32,668
Economically disadvantaged: 55%
Emergent bilingual students: 37%

Three largest racial demographics:
Hispanic: 56%
White: 29%
Asian: 7%

Dr. Jennifer Blaine, Superintendent
Linda Buchman, Associate Superintendent, Communications and Community Engagement,
linda.buchman@springbranchisd.com
    ●​ “Our T-2-4 vision is more than a graduation goal; it is a promise that every student who
        walks through our doors will be academically prepared for the complexities of a technical
        certificate, military service, or a college degree. By defining clear literacy and numeracy
        milestones, we ensure that rigor is embedded in the student experience from the very
        beginning.”
    ●​ “We believe that foundational literacy is a community-wide responsibility, which is why
        we’ve bridged the gap between our classrooms and our neighborhoods through
        initiatives like the Reading Buddies Program. This intentional focus on the early years
        allows us to use sophisticated data to catch gaps before they widen, ensuring every
        child is on a trajectory toward success.”

Background:
Spring Branch Independent School District (SBISD) serves a large, diverse student population
in Houston. Under the direction of Superintendent Dr. Jennifer Blaine, the district maintains a
rigorous focus on literacy, numeracy, and holistic student supports beginning in the earliest
grades. These efforts are anchored in the district’s T-2-4 vision, which aims to prepare all
students to attain a technical certificate, military training, or a two- or four-year degree. To reach
this goal, SBISD leverages sophisticated data analysis and high-impact community partnerships
to ensure all students meet essential academic milestones.

Strategies for Success:
Data-driven instruction and decision-making:
   ●​ T-2-4 is SBISD’s vision for all graduates to attain a technical certificate, military training,
       or a two-year or four-year degree. There are six core characteristics of a T-2-4 Ready
       Graduate, each of which are measured through defined milestones for fifth, eighth, and
       twelfth grades.
   ●​ The first of the six core characteristics is that students are academically prepared, which
       includes the goal that every student develops strong literacy, numeracy, scientific,
       technology, and reasoning skills. Milestones for this goal include mastery of specific
       literacy and numeracy skills such as using “number sense and reasonableness to solve
      problems” in fifth grade and applying “number sense, reasonableness, and
      approximation to determine solutions” by eighth grade.
   ●​ District-developed Priority Standard Assessments (PSAs) track student progress in
      math, ELA, science, and social studies. These short assessments are aligned to the
      classroom curriculum and are designed to measure students’ mastery of grade-level
      standards. Teacher teams and principals conduct regular data conversations to analyze
      PSA data and inform instructional decisions.
   ●​ Teachers are provided with exemplary work for every assignment they give to students
      to help with delivering high-quality feedback.
   ●​ All pre-kindergarten classrooms emphasize early literacy and numeracy through
      purposeful play, oral language development, storytelling, dramatization, and engaging,
      project-based learning experiences that foster critical thinking and problem-solving skills.
      Every nine weeks, students receive a report card that reflects their progress in mastering
      essential skills, as measured by detailed rubrics. The “Welcome to Pre-K” video
      highlights the program’s foundation for early learning.

Advancing literacy through community and classroom support:
   ●​ SBISD launched the ReadSBISD Reading Buddies Program in fall 2019 to increase
      second graders’ literacy levels through one-to-one tutoring. Through this program,
      volunteer Reading Buddies meet with the same student for 30 minutes a week for the
      duration or the school year.
   ●​ The district partners with local churches and community spaces to recruit volunteers,
      many of whom are part of the area’s large 65+ community. Volunteers receive training
      grounded in evidence-based reading instruction developed by the district’s ELA and
      communications teams.
   ●​ Since 2019, 641 students and 340 volunteers have participated in the program. Over
      60% of volunteers have served as a Ready Buddy for at least two years.
   ●​ According to SBISD, 88% of the students in the Reading Buddies program showed an
      increase in oral reading fluency from the beginning of the year to the end of the year.
   ●​ SBISD used a portion of its ESSER funding to heavily invest in early literacy. In the
      2021-2022 school year, every kindergarten classroom (a total of 71) was staffed with a
      paraprofessional trained in evidence-based instruction and data interpretation. Unlike
      traditional models, these paraprofessionals helped the teacher deliver instruction to the
      entire class rather than being assigned to specific students.
   ●​ SBISD reports that pre-kindergarten and kindergarten paraprofessionals helped reduce
      behavior districts and ensured that kindergarten students continued to outperform state
      and regional data on kindergarten readiness (over 10% higher than the state and
      regional averages in 2021-2022).

Strengthening foundational numeracy:
    ●​ The SBISD Counts! Math Parent Guide equips families of students in grades pre-K4 to
       second grade with information about the district’s approach to numeracy instruction and
   tips and strategies to help families support their students at home. Every student in the
   early grades receives a printed copy in English or Spanish to take home.
●​ Data-driven math instruction begins in pre-kindergarten. Students are given short
   assessments of learning in the beginning, middle, and end of the school year developed
   by campus teams to measure student progress.
